The Project Gutenberg eBook of Bethlehem, by Laurence Housman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Bethlehem
       A Nativity Play

Author: Laurence Housman

Release Date: December 30, 2020 [eBook #64178]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETHLEHEM ***




BETHLEHEM

[Illustration]




  BETHLEHEM

  A NATIVITY PLAY
  BY LAURENCE HOUSMAN
  PERFORMED WITH MUSIC
  BY JOSEPH MOORAT UNDER
  THE STAGE-DIRECTION OF
  EDWARD GORDON CRAIG
  DECEMBER MCMII


  LONDON
  MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
  NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  1902


  _All rights reserved_




ACT I.


  _CHORUS enters and speaks before the curtain._

  Ye Gentles, that come here to watch our play,
  Put, we beseech you, thought of us away!
  No standing here have we: in heart we kneel,
  With, at our hearts, this prayer,--that ye may feel
  How in Love’s hands time is a little thing!
  And so shall Love to-night your senses bring
  Back to the hills of Bethlehem, the fold
  Where shepherds watched their sheep, where angels told
  Of peace, goodwill to men, in Christ new-born,
  By Whom, from Virgin Birth, our flesh goes worn.
  Also, if we may guide you, ye shall see
  The manger where in great humility
  Lieth that Babe, the Maker of us all,
  By Mary’s side, amid the beasts in stall.
  And ye shall see the coming of the Kings,
  Led by a star; and Gabriel that brings
  Unto St. Joseph, in a dream by night,
  Word of King Herod’s fear, and counsels flight.
  So, lastly, ye shall see them rise and go,
  And the place vacant left. Yet ye shall know
  That Love remains, and that Faith sees it so.
  So, have ye hope! let Time your trust increase!
  Hark, I hear music! Christmas comes; ’tis peace!

  _Pastoral music: a shepherd’s voice is heard._

     ‘The world is old, to-night,
        The world is old;
      The stars around the fold
        Do show their light, do show their light.
      And so they did, and so,
      A thousand years ago,
    And so will do, dear love, when you lie cold.’

                                       [_The curtain opens._

  YOUNG SHEPHERD (_sings_).

      The world is still, to-night,
        The world is still;
      The snow on vale and hill
        Like wool lies white, like wool lies white.
      And so it was, and so,
      A thousand years ago,
    And so will be, good lads, when we lack will.

  WATCHER.

  Ay-oh, ay-oh, ay-oh!

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  There be good fairies up in air to-night:
  Come ere a frost so mild with stars so bright?
  The wind has shut itself in-door again,
  And all the air be saft like a’ter rain.

  WATCHER.

  Ay-oh, ay-oh, ay-oh!

  2ND SHEPHERD (_rising_).

  The sheep be quiet; the dogs have nought to do;
  The lambs come kind; there haven’t been a ewe
  Lost, nor a still one born, this moon, there an’t:
  A thing I can’t remember, nor I can’t,
  Since I’ve been shepherd:--that’s nigh forty year.

  3RD SHEPHERD.

  Well, well!

  4TH SHEPHERD.

              What star be that’n out yonder there?
  It’s been a-coming on, night a’ter night,
  This long time back, but never looked so bright
  As ’a do now.

  WATCHER.

  Ay-oh, ay-oh, ay-oh!

  4TH SHEPHERD.

                       D’you think stars have a way
  Of coming out like, special, when they got summut to say?
  I’ve often wondered how it is they are:
  You never seem to get no nearer to a star,--
  Walk a’ter ’em a mile they still seem just as far.

  3RD SHEPHERD.

  ’Tis as God made ’em. Like as they were geese,
  Go a’ter ’em, and they turns tail and flees;
  Then you go back, and back they come at you!
  So as God made ’em’s what they got to do.

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  Aye, I don’t doubt the stars lays facts to mind:
  There’s them as say men’s names be marked and signed,--
  Writ in the roof up there, for proof that God’s behind.

  WATCHER.

  Ay-oh, ay-oh, ay-oh!

  5TH SHEPHERD.

  You think a star knows what it’s all about,
  A-blazing for?

  1ST SHEPHERD.

                 I haven’t got a doubt
  He does! That star--now, don’t tell me no more
  You think he don’t know what he’s shining for!
  Look at him jerking and working, and a-winking and a-blinking;--
  Well,--that’s him thinking.

  3RD SHEPHERD.

  Well, if he thinks the things God sets him to,
  Like we poor men, he got enough to do!

  WATCHER.

  Ay-oh, ay-oh, ay-oh!

  4TH SHEPHERD.

  There’s old blind Abe a-looking! Don’t he seem
  As if he saw it?

  2ND SHEPHERD.

                   Aye! he likes to dream
  He’s won his sight back, tho’ it’s been twelve year gone.
  Abe, what d’you think you’ve got your eye upon?

  ABEL.

  A good sight! aye, and a sight as you can’t see
  So well as I. The thought just come to me,
  While all of you sat talking by my side,
  Like to the word the prophet prophesied;--
  And while you talked, the thought o’ it kep’ me dumb:--
  Shiloh, thinks I,--will I see Shiloh come?
  And all at once these words were in my head,--
  What he,--the man whose eyes were open--said
  Aforetime, ‘I shall see him;--but not now!’
  Says he, ‘I shall behold him;--but not nigh:
  ‘Out of Jacob there shall come forth a Star,
  ‘And a Sceptre in Israel shall be raised high.’--
  So he bare witness of things seen afar.
  And that being told so many years ago,
  Yet still to come, do surely seem to show
  How we be likelier to behold that Star
  Than he who only spoke o’ it from afar.
  And in that day, ’tis told, the dumb shall talk,
  The old shall leap, and the lame man shall walk,
  And the blind man recover back his sight!

  3RD SHEPHERD.

  Well, well, it may be so! God will do right.

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  May we be there to see when that day shows:
  What it can do for such as we--God knows!

  WATCHER.

  Ay-oh!...

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  Why! who be yon fine gentleman in white
  Stepping across the sheepfolds to the right?

  4TH SHEPHERD.

  How comes it that his face be lit so bright?

  3RD SHEPHERD.

  The blood pricks in my thumbs;
  ’Tis like a ghost he comes!

  _Enter GABRIEL._

  GABRIEL.

          Let nothing you annoy!
              Behold, I bring
          Good tidings of great joy:
              To you a King
  This day is born, to you and all mankind.
  Even Christ the Lord, to man’s estate resigned.

  3RD SHEPHERD.

  O Lord, O Lord! was ever the like heard tell!

  ABEL.

  Hold ye your peace, neighbours! he speaks us well.

  GABRIEL.

          And of that same
              Let this be for a sign:
          In Bethlehem,
              Cradled amid the kine,
  A Babe in swaddling-bands ye there shall find.

  4TH SHEPHERD.

  Have you no fear? oh, Abel, but you’re blind!

  ABEL.

  Peace, and give ear! New light shines in my mind.

  GABRIEL.

  And as a shepherd he shall feed
      His flocks, and in his arms shall bear
      The lambs, and like a father fair
  The ewes with young shall lead.

  _Enter ANGELS._

  ANGELS.

  SEMI-CHORUS.              SEMI-CHORUS.

  Glory to God              In the Highest!
  Who unto man              Now comes nighest.
  Peace be to earth!        Goodwill to all!
  Christ the new Birth      Redeems man’s fall.

  GABRIEL.

  Ye holy and humble men of fearful heart,
  Be not afraid with these to take your part!
  To-night God gives you sight; then be not blind;
  Behold with us the high celestial mind!
  Ye also with one voice must here rejoice.

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  We be poor mortals! Here’s all Heaven in sight!

  GABRIEL.

  The Heavens themselves are joined with earth to-night.
  Fear not, but rise! Mercy and Truth are met;
  And Righteousness on Peace her seal hath set.
            Stand and be strong,
            Ye, too, shall share our song!

  SEMI-CHORUS.

  Glory to God; on earth, peace, goodwill!
  He smites with His rod, and the waters are still;
  He maketh it bud for the evil and good,
  He lifts the low valley and bends the high hill.

  SEMI-CHORUS.

  Thou Christ art the Rod, and Thy reign shall be peace!
  At the power of Thy nod, all warfare shall cease.
  The desert shall blossom and be as the rose,
  When the Healing of nations from Bethlehem flows.

  CHORUS.

      Glory to God              In the Highest!
      Who unto man              Now comes nighest.
      Peace be to earth!        Goodwill to all!
      Christ the new Birth      Redeems man’s fall.

                                  [_The ANGELS disappear._
  4TH SHEPHERD.

  Sir, have we dreamed this?

  GABRIEL.

                             Let your own hearts tell!
  Do dreams bequeath such joy? Your bosoms swell,
  Your faces glow, your eyes are full of cheer.
  Why are they so? Lately you had great fear,
  And stood as huddled flocks before a storm;
  Have dreams, then, made you warm?

  4TH SHEPHERD.

                                    Oh, Sir, ’tis true!
  Yet scarcely do I know what next to do.

  2ND SHEPHERD.

  You come wi’ me, lad! come along o’ me,
  We’ll all be off to Bethlehem, and see
  What they be doing there! Lord, Lord, I doubt
  Whether I’ll know to find me way about
  With such high things a-happening!
                                     Sir, you see
  There ain’t much show about the likes o’ we,
  But what I say’s--if this be true--well, well,
  ’Tis the best news that ever I heard tell!

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  And the best fortune any on us has had!
  Lord, though, but don’t it make an old heart glad!
  Christ born? You say it is so, Sir? So be it!
  Thank God as we should be alive to see it!

  ABEL.

  Be He at Bethlehem?

  GABRIEL.

                      Aye, there go ye!
  While ye so fare, your folds shall guarded be;
  Round them even now stand those ye do not see.
  Go ye in peace!

  SHEPHERDS.

                  We thank you kindly, Sir.

  SHEPHERDS (_sing_).

      Now we will go, now we will go,
        The way we know to Bethlehem;
      That they may show, and we may know,
        ’Tis even so as you proclaim.

      And we will take the bread we bake,
        The wine we make, as gifts to them;
      And milk and cheese; and on our knees
        Will offer these at Bethlehem.

      And He shall know we love Him so,
        But cannot show a better way
      Of service dear, and loving cheer,
        Than we do here on Christmas Day.

                      [_Exeunt several of the SHEPHERDS._

  6TH SHEPHERD.

  Sir, do you think that I might make so bold
  As offer Him a young lamb from the fold?
  ’Twas the first dropped this lambing time; maybe
  He’ll take it kindly from the likes o’ we,
  We being simple shepherds.

  GABRIEL.

                             Simple? Yes!
  Would God, all minds had this same simpleness!
  Take Him what gifts ye will! To-night on earth
  All’s peace to greet Christ’s birth.

  5TH SHEPHERD.

                                       Noticed you that?
  He made the shepherd’s sign: ’a did it pat!

  SHEPHERDS (_without_).

  Come on, lads, come!

  6TH SHEPHERD.

                       Good-night, Sir.

  GABRIEL.

                                        Peace befall
  You and your ways! Good-night, friend; good-night, all.

                                        [_Exeunt SHEPHERDS._

  SHEPHERDS (_in the distance singing_).

  And we will go, and we will go,
    The way we know to Bethlehem;
  That Love may show, and we may know,
    ’Tis even so as you proclaim.

  _Enter the ANGEL OF THE STAR. He crosses the stage and departs._

  _Enter the KINGS._

  1ST KING.

  Hear me, O King of Kings,
    And give me my desire!

  2ND KING.

  Hive me beneath Thy wings,
    And guide my feet with fire!

  3RD KING.

  Unto that Holy Mount,
    Where forth from Thee goes Light.

  ALL.

  Whence springs a Living Fount
    To wash the whole world white.

  GABRIEL.

  Peace be with you, and hail!
  Where go ye this fair night,
  Travellers, and what seek ye?

  1ST KING.

  We seek from the hill the vale,
  And from the vale the hill.

  2ND KING.

  From the ends of the morning, rest;
  And from the East the West.

  3RD KING.

  In the darkness we seek fire,
  And out of dreams the heart’s desire!
  And, if to-day we fail,
  To-morrow we seek it still.

  GABRIEL.

  Are ye not weary, seeking so?
  Are ye not laden with care?

  1ST KING.

  We are not weary. If our feet be slow,
  ’Tis with the burden of the Love we bear.
  It is our longing for the Light we seek
  Which makes us weak.

  GABRIEL.

  What is the longing of each one?

  3RD KING.

  Melchior, wilt thou first speak?

  2ND KING.

  Too slow my footsteps move
  For the goal I seek to prove.
  My body is a waste,
  Through which my soul doth haste,
  Famished until it taste
  Its nameless new desire!
  A flame my spirit owns,
  Ashes are all my bones,
  Love lights in me such fire!
  I thirst! my throat is dried!
  I ask;--am still denied!
  Cry to be satisfied:
  Yet only as Love will.
  Now, if He come not first,
  Not death, but ease were worst;--
  Let me die, thirsting still!

  GABRIEL.

  And you?

  3RD KING.

           I have such Love!
  Beauty, I know not of,
  Hath laid on me the vision of its Light.
  When that Light shines, earth’s ends
  Therein shall all be friends:
  They shall not hurt nor kill, but on the height
  Named Holy shall be peace.
  Then shall all warfare cease,
  And every king his crown
  Shall at the cradle of a new-born Babe lay down.

  GABRIEL.

  And thou, that standest last,
  Say what desire thou hast?

  1ST KING.

  For Earth’s waiting to be done;
  For God to send forth His Son,
  Godhead and man made one!
  That creation, wrought afresh,
  May be finished and made whole;
  That the Word may become Flesh,
  And Earth receive her soul!
          Pray we for this,
          Seeing well how good it is.

  GABRIEL.

  Behold, this night shall bring you to your bliss.

  3RD KING.

  Whence comes thy knowledge to make hope so near?

  GABRIEL.

  Oh, let your ears be opened till they hear!
  Open your eyes, and mark with fearless sight
  The throng of thanksgiving which fills this night:
  Nor walks on heaven alone, but earth as well!
  Sound in sweet tone, celestial Choirs, and tell!

  ANGELS (_appearing_).

  Glory to God              In the Highest!
  Who unto man              Now comes nighest.
  Peace be to earth!        Goodwill to all!
  Christ the new Birth      Redeems man’s fall.

  1ST KING.

  Oh, ye blest sounds, be as the air we breathe!

  2ND KING.

  Oh, fair things seen, your light to us bequeath!

  3RD KING.

  And if there be an ending to our quest,
  Show, now, where lies our rest!

  GABRIEL.

  O Kings, your quest is ended now, earth joins
  To greet her Lord, in Heaven’s exultant strains.
  Righteousness is the girdle of His loins,
  And faithfulness the girdle of His reins.
  The Spirit of God shall rest on Him, of might,
  Of wisdom, and of counsel, and of fear:
  He shall not judge according unto sight,
  Neither reprove by the hearing of His ear:
  But by His righteousness shall He do right,
  And with His equity the meek repay;
  Out of His mouth a rod the earth shall smite,
  And by His breath the wicked He shall slay.
  The wolf shall make his dwelling in the fold,
  The leopard and the kid together play,
  The young lion with the fatling: and behold
  A Little Child shall lead them in the way!
  Then like the ox the lion shall eat straw,
  The calf and the young bear be in one pen;
  The suckling from his hole the asp shall draw,
  And the weaned child play by the adder’s den.
  They shall not hurt in all my Holy Hill,
  Nor shall there any more destruction be:
  The knowledge of the Lord the earth shall fill,
  Even as the water covereth the sea.
  And He shall raise His people from their sin.
  This is the way of Life: walk ye therein!

  1ST KING.

  Where shall we find Him? where throw off our load?

  GABRIEL.

  In Bethlehem Peace makes His fair abode.
  Yonder His star still lights you to your road.

                                        [_Exeunt the KINGS._




ACT II.


  _The inn-stable at Bethlehem. Without, voices are heard singing._

  ‘Noel, Noel, Noel,’
    Sang the church bell;
  ‘God’s in His Heaven,
    This know well!’

   Noel, Noel, Noel,
     Ding-dong-bell,
   God from High Heaven
     Comes on earth to dwell.

   ‘Noel, Noel, Noel,’
     Bells ring on earth,
   ‘Come and know well
     This bright Birth!’

  JOSEPH.

  Sleepest thou, Mary?

  MARY.

                       I sleep not; I pray.
  Behold, on me my Lord His Head doth lay.
  Look how in sleep He takes a mortal’s rest:
  See where His Hand is laid upon my breast!

  JOSEPH.

  Mary, I dread to see!

  MARY.

                        Nay, come more near;
  But wake Him not!

  JOSEPH.

                    Alas! I have such fear.

  MARY.

  I, too: my soul is glad through very dread
  While in this chamber God doth make His bed:
  For now our eyes behold the glorious Birth
  Which shall uplift again low-fallen earth.
  Here, where He rests, amid these hollowed rocks,
  I hear the world’s heart move in joyful shocks,--
  The pulsing of her rivers and her springs:
  I feel the air beat with the throb of wings:
  And farther up, amid the heavenly maze,
  The stars and planets with adoring gaze
  Look down and say, ‘O maid with favour stored,
  How com’st thou to be Mother of our Lord?’
  What can I answer, I? Let Gabriel
  Speak to those heavenly questioners, and tell
  How by the Holy Ghost this came to be;
  How power from the Highest o’ershadowed me,
  Till in my heart God came Himself to lie,
  Perfect fulfilment of all prophecy.
  Naught may I know save this: His handmaid I.

  VOICES.

  ‘Ave Maria, gratia plena, Dominus tecum! Benedicta tu in mulieribus,
    et Benedictus Fructus ventris tui, Jesus.’

                                     [_A knocking is heard._

  JOSEPH.

  Who knocks?

  SHEPHERD (_without_).

              A friend: we be all friendly men:
  We be the shepherds.

  JOSEPH.

                       Come in, shepherds, then:
  Here’s welcome waiting you! Behold and bless
  The Peace within your gates, the Plenteousness!

  _The SHEPHERDS enter._

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  Mother of God, welcome to Bethlehem!

  MARY.

  Shepherds of Israel, welcome to Christ’s Birth!

  OMNES.

  Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee! Blessed art thou
  among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary,
  Mother of God, pray for us sinners now, and in the hour of our death.
  Amen.

  MARY.

  Behold the handmaid of the Lord!
  So as His Word hath His Way been;
  Now Earth to Heaven doth room afford;
  The Godhead veiled in Flesh is seen.
    Come and adore, in form of man,
    The Word that was ere worlds began!

  OMNES.

  Mother Mary, hail!
    And of thy Grace,
  Lift away the veil
    That hides God’s face!

  Here God lies
    For a short space.
  Mary, Mother wise,
    Show us God’s face!

  Mary, all the lands,
    Mary, all the seas,
  Gather in thy hands
    To thy dear knees!

  Mary, maiden white,
    Mother, pure within,
  Show to mortal sight
    Love that cures sin!

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  Mother Mary, may we see God?

  MARY.

  Stand near in faith, behold,
    Be comforted by Him!
  Here, shepherds, is your fold.

  ABEL.

  Lady, I cannot see: mine eyes are dim.

  MARY.

  Come near, in faith: come near!
    Thou shalt win sight.
  Doubt not: have thou no fear!

  ABEL.

  Lady, mine eyes be healed and full of light!

  MARY.

  Even so, even so,
  Let Earth perceive and know!

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  Son of God, shine on us!

  2ND SHEPHERD.

  Lamb of God, look on us!

  3RD SHEPHERD.

  Shepherd of men, set Thy sign on us!

  4TH SHEPHERD.

  And lay Thy yoke on us!

  5TH SHEPHERD.

  And we will be thankful.

  1ST SHEPHERD (_kneeling_).

  Queen, Mother, pardon me who make so bold
  To speak! but hearts grown full be hard to hold
  To-night, as Heaven hath willed, have come thy way
  Poor folk with meagre speech yet much to say.
  So, if word lack, let thine own wisdom fill:
  And--give me countenance!--I’ll not speak ill.
  Dear Mother, pray for us! Foolish we be,
  Untaught and rude: but what we see we see,
  And what we hear we hear; to what’s above
  Our heads we bow: and what we love we love!
  And, loving thee since our first entrance in,
  Do thereby more love God, and more hate sin;
  And of all lips would have thy lips to pray
  Pardon for us and peace to seek His way.
    Fair Mother, we have old men here among,
  As thou may’st see; and thou, we see, art young:
  Yet the name ‘Mother’ runneth to the tongue
  That seeks a name for thee. May we not all
  Thee as our Lady and our Mother call,
  For thy Son’s sake?

  MARY.

                      Amen. So, shepherds, do!
  Call as Love bids you, and I’ll answer you.

  1ST SHEPHERD.

  Mother, I have laid bread here at thy feet.
  For thy Son’s sake, I pray thee take and eat!

  2ND SHEPHERD.

  Mother, I bring thee milk.

  3RD SHEPHERD.

                             I bring thee cheese.

  4TH SHEPHERD.

  I have brought nuts. Strengthen His teeth on these,
  When they begin to pair.

  5TH SHEPHERD.

                           Also here’s wine,
  Good for a festal, or when frost bites fine.
  Also my cloak is thine.

  6TH SHEPHERD.

  Dear Mother, for God’s sake,
  Wilt thou, I prithee, take
    This firstling from the fold?
  It is so beautiful,
  And thereto hath warm wool
    To ward one from the cold.
  Take it, then, to thy lap
    Beside thy Son:
  It may keep warm, mayhap,
    The Blessed One.

  MARY.

  It shall keep warm my heart, shepherd, to thee.

  7TH SHEPHERD.

  Mother, my empty hands do me a wrong:
  No gift have I, but in my lips a song
    Such as we shepherds sing.

  MARY.

                               Such songs are best.
  To-night your lips shall lull the Shepherd’s King
      To rest.

  7TH SHEPHERD (_sings_).

        The world is old to-night,
            The world is old;
        The stars around the fold
            Do show their light.
        And so they did, and so,
        A thousand years ago,
  And so will do, dear Love, when you lie cold.
  (_Speaks._) Nay, nay, but I can sing no more thereof;
  I had forgot the sadness of the end!

  MARY.

  Thou hast but prophesied how men shall scoff
    Even at Love, my friend.

                                       [_Knocking is heard._
  JOSEPH.

  Ho, there without! Who knocks? Come ye in peace?

  KINGS (_without_).

  Kings, seeking it, we come!

  JOSEPH.

                              Here enter, and find ease!


  _THE KINGS enter._

  1ST KING.

  Blessed be God!

  OMNES.

  Blessed be God!

  2ND KING.

  Blessed be His Holy Name!

  OMNES.

  Blessed be His Holy Name!

  3RD KING.

  Blessed be Jesus Christ, true God and true Man!

  OMNES.

  Blessed be Jesus Christ, true God and true Man!

  1ST KING.

  Oh, finished quest!
    Oh, rest!

  2ND KING.

  Oh, Fount, that first
  Of all hath satisfied my thirst!

  3RD KING.

  Oh, Light,
  That brings me sight!

  1ST KING.

      Thou Birth Divine,
          Behold,
      The earthly sign
  Of power and kingship, gold,
  Here in my hands I hold,
      And offer, to be Thine.

  2ND KING.

        This frankincense
            Let be
  A symbol, whence
  All men may learn to see
  How veiled a mystery
  Defeats man’s sense where Godhead deigns to be.

  3RD KING.

  Oh, Comforter of souls,
        I bring Thee myrrh.
  When grief my heart controls
  And darkness round me rolls,
        Sweet Saviour, be Thou near!

  THE THREE KINGS.

  Thanksgiving, Praise, and Prayer,
        Three offerings meet,
  We lay in equal share
        Before Christ’s feet.

  MARY.

  Your welcome gifts,
  Proffered in love, from Earth to Heaven He lifts.

  THE KINGS.

  Now see we Love on Earth His throne!
        All we have known,
            Or hoped to gain,
        Was this alone--
            That He might reign!

  OMNES.

            That He might reign!
        Oh, welcome Birth! let all adore
        The Christ made Man for evermore.

  THE SHEPHERDS.

        ’Tis Christmas morn:
            Come ye, and bow the knee
            Lo, here we see
        The perfect Man is born.

  CHORUS.

  (_in alternate parts, KINGS and SHEPHERDS_).

        For this fair Birth
            (Which now we see!)
        Shows forth God’s worth,
            (Then sing we merrily!)
        And makes glad earth,
        And brings man mirth,
            (So sing we merrily this fair Birth!)

  THE KINGS.

    ’Tis Christmas Day:
        Oh pray,--put off your sins!
        This day begins
    For man the perfect way.

  CHORUS (_as before_).

        For this fair Birth, etc.

  [_During this song the Attendants of the KINGS have entered._

  OMNES.

  Mother Mary, give us thy Son’s Blessing!

  (_They sing._) Mary, Gate of Day,
                     Lend thine intercession!
                 Holy Mother Mary,
                     Pray for my transgression!

                 Ere He yet touched Earth,
                     He did first touch thee;
                 Through thy perfect worth
                     God reached down for me.

  MARY.

            The word expressed
                In Flesh hath come;
            Against my breast
                The Voice lies dumb,
  That shall be of all prophecies the sum.

            Oh, Thou dread Voice
                Of Heaven’s decree,
            Who madest choice
                To dwell with me,
  Now through my lips, this once, let utterance be!

            My Peace I leave,
                My Peace I give:
            All that receive
                The same shall live;
  And tribute hearts win joy retributive.

            The Cup I bless,
                The Bread I break,
            Is Righteousness!
                Draw near and take!
  Eat, drink, and hold remembrance for Love’s sake!

            The peace of Peace,
                Outpassing sense,
            Give your mind’s ease
                When ye go hence.
  Love, peace, and pardon be your recompense!

  OMNES.

  Hail, Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee! Blessed art thou
  among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary,
  Mother of God, pray for us sinners now, and in the hour of our death.
  Amen.

  MARY.

  Kings from far countries have ye come to see
  A King Whose reign shall make all kingdoms free.
  Low at His feet your crowns ye cast to ground;
  From this day forward ye shall go more crowned;
  For, named hereafter, ye shall be named wise,
  Seeing that in Heaven ye watched Christ’s star arise.
  Great kings ye came, but much more great ye go,
  Who to His state have bowed yourselves so low.
    And you, dear Shepherds, to your settled folds
  Return, and father your sweet flocks to rest!
  Though Heavenly signs depart, Heaven’s purpose holds,
  Where Earth’s Redemption slumbers at my breast.
  Look where He lies! Kiss ye His feet, and go!
  Your Shepherd He: Whose sheep are ye, I know.

  When mothers teach to babes their mother-tongue,
      This tale shall first be told:
      How to His birth ye came in days of old,
  While starlight led and seraph-voices sung.
  So, in that story, shall your names stay young.
      Farewell; give thanks for this! Ye to Christ’s fold
      Are come. Take all the bliss that hearts on earth may hold!

               [_Exeunt KINGS, SHEPHERDS, and ATTENDANTS._

  SHEPHERDS AND KINGS (_without_).

    I heard on Christmas night
        The loud bells ringing:
    ‘New Life and Light
        Christ comes bringing!’

  _Chorus._

          Oh, that is true, is true,
              And better could not be!
          So God bless you!
              And God bless me!

    I heard on Christmas night
        The glad news pealing:
    ‘Christ to human sight
        Now gives healing!’

          Oh, that is true, is true,
              And better could not be!
          So God bless you!
              And God bless me!

    I heard on Christmas night
        The high Heavens telling:
    ‘Christ who left His height,
        On earth finds dwelling!’

          Oh, that is true, is true,
              And better could not be!
          So God bless you!
              And God bless me!

    From Mary, Queen of Might,
        Comes down sweet saying:
    ‘I hear, on Christmas night,
        All poor hearts praying!’

          Oh, that is true, is true,
              And better could not be!
          So God bless you!
              And God bless me!

  _Enter GABRIEL._

  GABRIEL.

      Servant of God, sleep not, awake!
        Saddle the ass ere dawn of day;
      The Mother, and the young Child take,
        Whom Herod seeketh now to slay;
      Get thee hence ere the wakening bird
        Hath sung; to Egypt win thy way:
      There, till I come and bring thee word,
        Shalt thou in hiding stay.
      As thou hast heard, make haste, obey!

                                                    [_Exit._
  JOSEPH.

      Mary, arise; hence must we go,
        Even before the dawn of day.

  MARY.

  It is God’s will?

  JOSEPH.

                    ’Tis even so:
  His angel’s word.

  MARY.

                    Which we obey.

                                                  [_Exeunt._
  VOICES OF CAROL-SINGERS (_without_).

      God rest you, merry gentlemen,
          Let nothing you dismay!
      Because that Jesus Christ our Lord
          Is born on Christmas Day!


  [CURTAIN.]


  _Enter CHORUS._

  _Chorus._ Oh Maid and Holy Child, where have ye gone?
  Lost are the voices, sets the Star that shone:
  Back to their folds have gone the shepherd-band:
  Each king is now returned to his own land.
  Love is gone forth into the world to win
  Saints to their rest, and sinners back from sin.
    Gentles, O ye that here have watched our play,
  Tell me, I pray you, did He pass _your_ way?
  Say have ye Him safe, each one, in his breast?
  Oh, hold Him well! So shall we all have rest.
  The grace of Jesus Christ, who is our Lord,
  The Love of God, the Holy Ghost’s accord,
  Be with us all! And Heaven be our reward!
                                            Amen.


_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETHLEHEM ***

***** This file should be named 64178-0.txt or 64178-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/6/4/1/7/64178/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
